#feature extraction code

Introduction
-------------

This folder consists of Matlab and Python code used to extract features for use with machine learning algorithms as described in _"Comparison of machine learning algorithms applied to birdsong element classification"_. The code is applied to audio files produced by custom Labview software. 
* The actual feature files created using this code are here: [feature files](https://drive.google.com/folderview?id=0B0BKW2mh0ySnY3NDcjZCM1dLS1k&usp=drive_web)
* Example audio files are found here: [example day of song](https://drive.google.com/folderview?id=0B0BKW2mh0ySnYWhkYmV6WnNFQ1U&usp=sharing)
 * The code below runs on all such files in any given directory. So to test it, download the audio files and place them all in one directory.
* As explained in the paper, the experiments sought to compare the support vector machine and k-Nearest Neighbor algorithms.
 - The example audio files are from the day of song from one bird used to train classifiers for that bird
   * To train SVM classifiers, the file used was: gy6or6_feature_file_from_03-24-12_generated_02-14-16_23-05.mat
   * To train k-NN classifiers for this bird, the file used was: gy6or6_ftr_cell_03242012_generated_12152015.mat

Instructions 
-------------

**All the features files can be generated by running one Matlab script:**
```matlab
>>script_to_generate_feature_files
```
 
Below I explain how the different functions called by that script work to extract features.
## SVM
### features used for support vector machine experiments
The Matlab script "makeAllFeatures" was written by R.O. Tachibana and calculates the features used in [Tachibana et al. 2014](http://journals.plos.org/plosone/article?id=10.1371/journal.pone.0092584). The "make_features_for_svm.m" script is simply a wrapper around makeAllFeatures that loops through all the files in a directory. It runs the Tachibana script on all syllables in a file. After looping through all the files, it generates an output file with an array containing all the features from all audio files in the directory.
The file "extract_Tachibana_features.py" is an attempt to translate the "makeAllFeatures" file to Python.
So to reproduce the file 'gy6or6_feature_file_from_03-24-12_generated_02-14-16_23-05.mat', you would just type the following:
```matlab
>>make_feature_file_for_svm
```

## k-NN
### features used for k-Nearest Neighbor experiments
k-NN feature extraction requires three functions that should be run on a directory of song files in the following order:
1.make_spect_files_for_knn
 * generates spectrograms of each segmented syllable with "spect_from_rawsyl" function. This produces .cbin.spect files  
 *Note that for the experiments in this paper I used 8 ms windows with 50% overlap.*  
2.make_feature_files_for_knn
 * loops through .spect files and calculates features, saves them to .cbin.ftr
3.concat_knn_ftrs
 * loops through .cbin.ftr files and concatenates each feature vector into a giant array

Hence, using the [example audo files](https://drive.google.com/folderview?id=0B0BKW2mh0ySnYWhkYmV6WnNFQ1U&usp=sharing), you should be able to reproduce the feature file 'gy6or6_ftr_cell_03242012_generated_12152015.mat' by entering the following lines into Matlab:
```matlab
>>make_spect_files(8,0.5)
>>make_feature_files(1)
>>concat_ftrs
```

Please see the "docstrings" in the Matlab files for an explanation of the arguments.
The other Matlab functions in this folder do not handle feature extraction per se but they are called by the feature extraction functions and required for those to work. (Most are part of our lab's established codebase for extracting song syllables from audio files of birdsong and were originally written by Evren Tumer.)
